.. _faq:

================================
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
================================

Can I put the preview in a window?
==================================

No. The camera module's preview system is quite crude: it simply tells the GPU
to overlay the preview on the Pi's video output. The preview has no knowledge
(or interaction with) the X-Windows environment (incidentally, this is why the
preview works quite happily from the command line, even without anyone logged
in).

That said, the preview area can be resized and repositioned via the
:attr:`~picamera.PiRenderer.window` attribute of the
:attr:`~picamera.PiCamera.preview` object. If your program can respond to
window repositioning and sizing events you can "cheat" and position the preview
within the borders of the target window. However, there's currently no way to
allow anything to appear on top of the preview so this is an imperfect solution
at best.

Help! I started a preview and can't see my console!
===================================================

As mentioned above, the preview is simply an overlay over the Pi's video
output.  If you start a preview you may therefore discover you can't see your
console anymore and there's no obvious way of getting it back. If you're
confident in your typing skills you can try calling
:meth:`~picamera.PiCamera.stop_preview` by typing "blindly" into your hidden
console. However, the simplest way of getting your display back is usually
to hit ``Ctrl+D`` to terminate the Python process (which should also shut down
the camera).

When starting a preview, you may want to set the *alpha* parameter of the
:meth:`~picamera.PiCamera.start_preview` method to something like 128. This
should ensure that when the preview is displayed, it is partially transparent
so you can still see your console.

The preview doesn't work on my PiTFT screen
===========================================

The camera's preview system directly overlays the Pi's output on the HDMI or
composite video ports. At this time, it will not operate with GPIO-driven
displays like the PiTFT. Some projects, like the `Adafruit Touchscreen Camera
project`_, have approximated a preview by rapidly capturing unencoded images
and displaying them on the PiTFT instead.

.. _Adafruit Touchscreen Camera project: https://learn.adafruit.com/diy-wifi-raspberry-pi-touch-cam/overview

How much power does the camera require?
=======================================

The camera `requires 250mA`_ when running. Note that simply creating a
:class:`~picamera.PiCamera` object means the camera is running (due to the
hidden preview that is started to allow the auto-exposure algorithm to run). If
you are running your Pi from batteries, you should
:meth:`~picamera.PiCamera.close` (or destroy) the instance when the camera is
not required in order to conserve power. For example, the following code
captures 60 images over an hour, but leaves the camera running all the time::

    import picamera
    import time

    with picamera.PiCamera() as camera:
        camera.resolution = (1280, 720)
        time.sleep(1) # Camera warm-up time
        for i, filename in enumerate(camera.capture_continuous('image{counter:02d}.jpg')):
            print('Captured %s' % filename)
            # Capture one image a minute
            time.sleep(60)
            if i == 59:
                break

By contrast, this code closes the camera between shots (but can't use the
convenient :meth:`~picamera.PiCamera.capture_continuous` method as a result)::

    import picamera
    import time

    for i in range(60):
        with picamera.PiCamera() as camera:
            camera.resolution = (1280, 720)
            time.sleep(1) # Camera warm-up time
            filename = 'image%02d.jpg' % i
            camera.capture(filename)
            print('Captured %s' % filename)
        # Capture one image a minute
        time.sleep(59)

.. note::

    Please note the timings in the scripts above are approximate. A more
    precise example of timing is given in :ref:`timelapse_capture`.

If you are experiencing lockups or reboots when the camera is active, your
power supply may be insufficient. A practical minimum is 1A for running a Pi
with an active camera module; more may be required if additional peripherals
are attached.

.. _requires 250mA: http://www.raspberrypi.org/help/faqs/#cameraPower

How can I take two consecutive pictures with equivalent settings?
=================================================================

See the :ref:`consistent_capture` recipe.

Can I use picamera with a USB webcam?
=====================================

No. The picamera library relies on libmmal which is specific to the Pi's camera
module.

How can I tell what version of picamera I have installed?
=========================================================

The picamera library relies on the setuptools package for installation
services.  You can use the setuptools ``pkg_resources`` API to query which
version of picamera is available in your Python environment like so::

    >>> from pkg_resources import require
    >>> require('picamera')
    [picamera 1.2 (/usr/local/lib/python2.7/dist-packages)]
    >>> require('picamera')[0].version
    '1.2'

If you have multiple versions installed (e.g. from ``pip`` and ``apt-get``)
they will not show up in the list returned by the ``require`` method. However,
the first entry in the list will be the version that ``import picamera`` will
import.

If you receive the error "No module named pkg_resources", you need to install
the ``pip`` utility. This can be done with the following command in Raspbian::

    $ sudo apt-get install python-pip

How come I can't upgrade to the latest version?
===============================================

If you are using Raspbian, firstly check that you haven't got both a PyPI
(``pip``) and an apt (``apt-get``) installation of picamera installed
simultaneously. If you have, one will be taking precedence and it may not be
the most up to date version.

Secondly, please understand that while the PyPI release process is entirely
automated (so as soon as a new picamera release is announced, it will be
available on PyPI), the release process for Raspbian packages is semi-manual.
There is typically a delay of a few days after a release before updated
picamera packages become accessible in the Raspbian repository.

Users desperate to try the latest version make choose to uninstall their
``apt`` based copy (uninstall instructions are provided in the
:ref:`installation instructions <raspbian_install2>`, and install using
:ref:`pip instead <system_install2>`. However, be aware that keeping a PyPI
based installation up to date is a more manual process (sticking with ``apt``
ensures everything gets upgraded with a simple ``sudo apt-get upgrade``
command).
